revamp cv docs and fix rf-detr (#46219)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/tasks/instance_segmentation.md

rendered properly in your Markdown viewer.

-->

# Instance segmentation

[[open-in-colab]]

Instance segmentation is the computer vision task of detecting objects in an image and segmenting each one at the pixel level. Unlike object detection (which outputs bounding boxes), instance segmentation produces a precise mask for every detected object, allowing you to distinguish individual instances even when they overlap.

In this guide, you will learn how to:

 1. Load an instance segmentation dataset from the Hugging Face Hub.
 2. Fine-tune [RF-DETR-Seg](https://huggingface.co/Roboflow/rf-detr-seg-medium), a transformer-based instance segmentation model, using the Transformers [`Trainer`].
 3. Evaluate your model with mean IoU.
 4. Run inference and visualize predictions.

We'll use the [satellite-building-segmentation](https://huggingface.co/datasets/merve/satellite-building-segmentation) dataset, which contains ~9.6k satellite images annotated with building instance masks.

<Tip>

To see all architectures and checkpoints compatible with this task, we recommend checking the [task-page](https://huggingface.co/tasks/image-segmentation).

> </Tip>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> To see all architectures and checkpoints compatible with this task, we recommend checking the [task-page](https://huggingface.co/tasks/image-segmentation).
```

Before you begin, install all the necessary libraries:

```bash

> pip install -Uq transformers>=5.9 datasets torchvision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install -Uq "transformers>=5.9" datasets torchvision
```

```

We encourage you to share your model with the community. Log in to your Hugging Face account to upload it to the Hub when training is complete:

```py
>>> from huggingface_hub import notebook_login

>>> notebook_login()
```

## Load the dataset

> The [satellite-building-segmentation](https://huggingface.co/datasets/merve/satellite-building-segmentation) dataset is in native Hugging Face Datasets format, so we can load it directly with `load_dataset`. Each row contains:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [satellite-building-segmentation](https://huggingface.co/datasets/merve/satellite-building-segmentation) dataset is in native Hugging Face Datasets format, so load it directly with `load_dataset`. Each row contains:
```

- `image`: the satellite image (PIL)
- `image_id`: unique identifier for the image
- `width` / `height`: image dimensions
- `objects`: a dict of per-instance annotations with `id`, `category`, `bbox`, `area`, `segmentation` (polygon coordinates), and `iscrowd`

```py
>>> from datasets import load_dataset

>>> MODEL_ID = "Roboflow/rf-detr-seg-medium"
>>> DATASET_ID = "merve/satellite-building-segmentation"

>>> ds = load_dataset(DATASET_ID)
>>> train_ds = ds["train"]
>>> valid_ds = ds["validation"]
>>> print(f"Train: {len(train_ds)} images, Valid: {len(valid_ds)} images")
```

> Let's explore what a single example looks like. Each record has an `image`, an `image_id`, and an `objects` dict containing per-instance annotations. Each instance has a `bbox` in `[x, y, width, height]` format and a `segmentation` field with polygon coordinates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspect a single example. Each record has an `image`, an `image_id`, and an `objects` dict containing per-instance annotations. Each instance has a `bbox` in `[x, y, width, height]` format and a `segmentation` field with polygon coordinates:
```

```py
>>> sample = train_ds[0]
>>> print(f"Image ID: {sample['image_id']}")
>>> print(f"Image size: {sample['image'].size}")
>>> print(f"Number of instances: {len(sample['objects']['id'])}")
>>> print(f"\nObjects keys: {list(sample['objects'].keys())}")
>>> print(f"First bbox: {sample['objects']['bbox'][0]}")
>>> print(f"First category: {sample['objects']['category'][0]}")
```

> Let's visualize an example with its ground-truth masks to get a sense of the data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visualize an example with its ground-truth masks:
```

```py
>>> import numpy as np
>>> import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
>>> from PIL import Image, ImageDraw

>>> sample = train_ds[0]
>>> image = sample["image"].convert("RGB")

>>> fig, axes = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(14, 6))
>>> axes[0].imshow(image)
>>> axes[0].set_title("Original image")
>>> axes[0].axis("off")

>>> overlay = image.copy()
>>> draw = ImageDraw.Draw(overlay, "RGBA")
>>> objects = sample["objects"]
>>> for seg in objects["segmentation"]:
...     for poly in seg:
...         coords = list(zip(poly[0::2], poly[1::2]))
...         color = tuple(np.random.randint(50, 255, 3)) + (100,)
...         draw.polygon(coords, fill=color, outline="red")

>>> axes[1].imshow(overlay)
>>> axes[1].set_title(f"Ground truth ({len(objects['id'])} buildings)")
>>> axes[1].axis("off")
>>> plt.tight_layout()
>>> plt.show()
```

![Dataset Sample](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/transformers/tasks/satellite-dataset.png)

## Load the model and image processor

> We'll use [`AutoImageProcessor`] and [`AutoModelForInstanceSegmentation`] to load the RF-DETR-Seg model. When loading the model, we pass `id2label` and `label2id` mappings to configure the classification head for our single "building" class. Since the pretrained model was trained on COCO (91 classes), we set `ignore_mismatched_sizes=True` to reinitialize the classification head with the correct number of outputs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [`AutoImageProcessor`] and [`AutoModelForInstanceSegmentation`] to load the RF-DETR-Seg model. When loading the model, pass `id2label` and `label2id` mappings to configure the classification head for the single "building" class. Since the pretrained model was trained on COCO (91 classes), set `ignore_mismatched_sizes=True` to reinitialize the classification head with the correct number of outputs.
```

```py
>>> from transformers import AutoImageProcessor, AutoModelForInstanceSegmentation

>>> id2label = {0: "building"}
>>> label2id = {"building": 0}

>>> image_processor = AutoImageProcessor.from_pretrained(MODEL_ID)
>>> model = AutoModelForInstanceSegmentation.from_pretrained(
...     MODEL_ID,
...     id2label=id2label,
...     label2id=label2id,
...     ignore_mismatched_sizes=True,
... )
```

## Preprocess the data

To fine-tune the model, you must preprocess the data to match the format the model expects. The `RfDetrImageProcessor` does all the heavy lifting when you pass it images and COCO-format annotations with `return_segmentation_masks=True`:

1. **Rasterizes** polygon segmentations into binary masks
2. **Resizes** images, bounding boxes, and masks to the model's input size
3. **Normalizes** pixel values with ImageNet mean/std
4. **Converts** bounding boxes from `[x, y, w, h]` to normalized `[cx, cy, w, h]`

> 5. **Pads** images to a uniform size and creates a `pixel_mask`

Reviewer: i wouldn't bold this text as it becomes distracting when used too much like this

> Our transform reconstructs the COCO-style annotation dicts that the image processor expects from the dataset's `objects` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transform reconstructs the COCO-style annotation dicts that the image processor expects from the dataset's `objects` column.
```

> We use [`~datasets.Dataset.with_transform`] to apply preprocessing lazily (on-the-fly when samples are loaded), which avoids storing the entire processed dataset in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [`~datasets.Dataset.with_transform`] to apply preprocessing lazily (on-the-fly when samples are loaded), which avoids storing the entire processed dataset in memory.
```

...             continue
...         annotations = [
...             {
...                 "id": ann_id,
...                 "image_id": img_id,
...                 "category_id": cat,
...                 "bbox": bbox,
...                 "area": area,
...                 "segmentation": seg,
...                 "iscrowd": crowd,
...             }
...             for ann_id, cat, bbox, area, seg, crowd in zip(
...                 objects["id"],
...                 objects["category"],
...                 objects["bbox"],
...                 objects["area"],
...                 objects["segmentation"],
...                 objects["iscrowd"],
...             )
...         ]
...         images.append(image.convert("RGB"))
...         targets.append({"image_id": img_id, "annotations": annotations})
...
...     if not images:
...         return {}
...     return image_processor(
...         images=images, annotations=targets, return_segmentation_masks=True, return_tensors="pt"
...     )

>>> transform = partial(transform_batch, image_processor=image_processor)
>>> train_ds = train_ds.shuffle(seed=42).with_transform(transform)
>>> valid_ds = valid_ds.with_transform(transform)
```

> Let's verify what a preprocessed example looks like. You should see `pixel_values` (the normalized image tensor), `pixel_mask` (indicating real pixels vs padding), and `labels` (a dict with `class_labels`, `boxes` in normalized center format, and binary `masks`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify a preprocessed example. It contains `pixel_values` (the normalized image tensor), `pixel_mask` (indicating real pixels vs padding), and `labels` (a dict with `class_labels`, `boxes` in normalized center format, and binary `masks`):
```

```py
>>> example = train_ds[0]
>>> print(f"pixel_values shape: {example['pixel_values'].shape}")
>>> print(f"pixel_mask shape: {example['pixel_mask'].shape}")
>>> print(f"labels keys: {list(example['labels'].keys())}")
>>> print(f"  class_labels: {example['labels']['class_labels']}")
>>> print(f"  boxes shape: {example['labels']['boxes'].shape}")
>>> print(f"  masks shape: {example['labels']['masks'].shape}")
```

## Data collator

> Since each image has a different number of object instances, labels are variable-length dictionaries and cannot be stacked into a single tensor. We define a custom collate function that stacks `pixel_values` and `pixel_mask` normally, but keeps `labels` as a list of per-image dicts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since each image has a different number of object instances, labels are variable-length dictionaries and cannot be stacked into a single tensor. Define a custom collate function that stacks `pixel_values` and `pixel_mask` normally, but keeps `labels` as a list of per-image dicts:
```

```py
>>> import torch

>>> def collate_fn(batch: list[dict[str, Any]]) -> dict[str, Any]:
...     out = {
...         "pixel_values": torch.stack([x["pixel_values"] for x in batch]),
...         "labels": [x["labels"] for x in batch],
...     }
...     if "pixel_mask" in batch[0]:
...         out["pixel_mask"] = torch.stack([x["pixel_mask"] for x in batch])
...     return out
```

## Define evaluation metric: Mean IoU

> 

Reviewer 2: Would consider adding a short mention of mAP and how it ties to mIoU as mAP is oftentimes the default metric for instance seg benchmarks.

> To track segmentation quality during training, we compute a **union-based mean IoU** at each evaluation epoch. For each image, we:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To track segmentation quality during training, compute a *union-based mean IoU* at each evaluation epoch. For each image:
```

1. Filter predicted masks by confidence score (> 0.5)
2. Merge all predicted instance masks into a single binary "buildings" map
3. Merge all ground-truth instance masks into a single binary map
4. Compute Intersection-over-Union between the two maps

> This gives a per-image metric of "how well does the model cover the buildings". We average it over the full validation set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This gives a per-image metric of "how well does the model cover the buildings", which is averaged over the full validation set.
```

> We implement this as a [`Trainer`] subclass that runs an extra inference pass during evaluation to compute the metric:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implement this as a [`Trainer`] subclass that runs an extra inference pass during evaluation to compute the metric:
```

```py
>>> import torch.nn.functional as F
>>> from transformers import Trainer

>>> @torch.no_grad()
... def compute_mean_iou(pred_masks, gt_masks, target_size):
...     """Union-based IoU: merge all instances per image, then compute IoU."""
...     pred_union = (pred_masks.sigmoid() > 0.5).any(dim=0).float()

> ...     pred_union = F.interpolate(pred_union[None, None], size=target_size, mode="bilinear")[0, 0] > 0.5

Reviewer 2: The order of operations looks surprising to me. I would have expected `interpolate -> sigmoid -> convert to bool` instead of `sigmoid -> convert to bool -> interpolate -> convert to bool`

...
...     gt_union = gt_masks.any(dim=0).bool()
...
...     intersection = (pred_union & gt_union).sum().float()
...     union = (pred_union | gt_union).sum().float()
...     return (intersection / union.clamp(min=1)).item()

>>> class SegTrainer(Trainer):
...     """Trainer that computes mean IoU during evaluation."""
...
...     def evaluate(self, eval_dataset=None, **kwargs):

> ...         metrics = super().evaluate(eval_dataset=eval_dataset, **kwargs)

Reviewer 3: since we iterate after on the eval dataloader, doesn't it cost 2x? `eval_do_concat_batches=False` should be enough iiuc

...             pixel_mask = batch.get("pixel_mask")
...             if pixel_mask is not None:
...                 pixel_mask = pixel_mask.to(device)
...
...             outputs = model(pixel_values=pixel_values, pixel_mask=pixel_mask)
...             pred_masks = outputs.pred_masks
...             logits = outputs.logits
...
...             for i, gt_label in enumerate(batch["labels"]):
...                 gt_m = gt_label["masks"].to(device)
...                 if gt_m.numel() == 0:
...                     continue
...                 target_h, target_w = gt_m.shape[-2:]
...
...                 scores = logits[i].sigmoid().max(dim=-1).values
...                 keep = scores > 0.5
...                 pm = pred_masks[i][keep]
...                 if pm.numel() == 0:
...                     ious.append(0.0)
...                     continue
...                 ious.append(compute_mean_iou(pm, gt_m, (target_h, target_w)))
...
...         mean_iou = sum(ious) / len(ious) if ious else 0.0
...         metrics["eval_mean_iou"] = mean_iou
...         self.log({"eval_mean_iou": mean_iou})
...         print(f"\n*** Mean IoU: {mean_iou:.4f} ***")
...         return metrics
```

## Training

> Now that the data, model, and metrics are ready, we can set up training. A few important notes on the [`TrainingArguments`]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the data, model, and metrics ready, set up training.. A few important notes on the [`TrainingArguments`]:
```

- **`remove_unused_columns=False`**: Required because the default behavior would drop columns before our transform runs.
- **`eval_do_concat_batches=False`**: Instance segmentation labels are variable-length dicts — they cannot be concatenated across batches.
- **`metric_for_best_model="eval_mean_iou"`**: Select the best checkpoint by segmentation quality, not just loss.

> - **`fp16=True`**: Mixed precision training significantly speeds up training on modern GPUs.

Reviewer: would also un-bold these :)

...     per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
...     learning_rate=1e-4,
...     weight_decay=1e-4,
...     lr_scheduler_type="cosine",
...     warmup_ratio=0.1,
...     fp16=True,
...     dataloader_num_workers=4,
...     eval_strategy="epoch",
...     save_strategy="epoch",
...     save_total_limit=2,
...     load_best_model_at_end=True,
...     metric_for_best_model="eval_mean_iou",
...     greater_is_better=True,
...     remove_unused_columns=False,
...     eval_do_concat_batches=False,
...     push_to_hub=True,
... )

>>> trainer = SegTrainer(
...     model=model,
...     args=training_args,
...     train_dataset=train_ds,
...     eval_dataset=valid_ds,
...     processing_class=image_processor,
...     data_collator=collate_fn,
... )

>>> trainer.train()
```

If you set `push_to_hub=True` in the training arguments, the training checkpoints are pushed to the
Hugging Face Hub. Upon training completion, push the final model to the Hub as well by calling the [`~transformers.Trainer.push_to_hub`] method.

```py
>>> trainer.push_to_hub(
...     dataset=DATASET_ID,
...     tags=["instance-segmentation", "rf-detr-seg", "vision", "satellite", "building"],
... )
```

## Inference

> Now that you have a fine-tuned model, you can use it for inference on new satellite images. The workflow is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have a fine-tuned model, use it for inference on new satellite images. The workflow is:
```

1. Preprocess the image with the image processor
2. Run a forward pass through the model
3. Post-process outputs with `post_process_instance_segmentation` to get pixel-level masks

The post-processing step converts the raw query outputs (logits + low-res masks) into full-resolution instance segmentation maps, applying score thresholding and mask binarization.

```py
>>> from datasets import load_dataset

>>> test_ds = load_dataset(DATASET_ID, split="test")
>>> sample = test_ds[0]
>>> image = sample["image"].convert("RGB")

>>> device = next(model.parameters()).device
>>> inputs = image_processor(images=image, return_tensors="pt").to(device)

>>> with torch.no_grad():
...     outputs = model(**inputs)

>>> results = image_processor.post_process_instance_segmentation(
...     outputs, threshold=0.5, target_sizes=[(image.height, image.width)]
... )[0]

>>> print(f"Detected {len(results['segments_info'])} buildings")
>>> for seg_info in results["segments_info"][:5]:
...     print(f"  Building (score: {seg_info['score']:.3f})")
```

> Let's visualize the predictions. The segmentation map assigns each pixel a segment ID (-1 for background). We overlay each detected building with a random color:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visualize the predictions. The segmentation map assigns each pixel a segment ID (-1 for background). Overlay each detected building with a random color:
```
